ReadMe.md, before:

### Vishap Oberon

[ⱱishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



### Ѵishap Oberon

[Ѵishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



### Ꮙishap Oberon

[Ꮙishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



### 𝓥ishap Oberon

[𝓥ishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



##### Licensing

Vishap Oberon's frontend and C backend engine is a fork of Josef Templ’s Ofront, which has been released
under the FreeBSD License. Unlike Ofront, Vishap Oberon does not include the Oberon v4 environment.

The Ulm Oberon Library is distributed under GPL.

The Ooc library is distributed under GPL.

Voc tools are distributed under GPLv3.

Most of the runtime in libVishapOberon is distributed under GPLv3 with runtime exception.

Proprietry code using the Ulm or Ooc libraries may not be statically linked as they are
distributed under the GPL.


##### Platform support

Vishap Oberon supports 32 and 64 bit little-endian architectures including Intel x86 and x64, arm and ppc.

It compiles under gcc, clang and Microsoft Visual C.

Installation supports GNU/Linux, MAC OSX, BSD and Windows (native and cygwin).

##### Language support

Vishap Oberon supports the Oberon 2 programming language, including type-bound procedures.

It can also compile programs written to the Oberon07 report.


##### Libraries

Vishap Oberon comes with libraries easing the porting of code from the major
Oberon systems:

 - Oberon V4 and S3 compatible library set.

 - ooc (optimizing oberon-2 compiler) library port.

 - Ulm’s Oberon system library port.

Some other freely redistributable libraries are available as a part of voc distribution.


##### Features

See [Features](/doc/Features.md).

##### Installing

See [Installing](/doc/Installing.md).

##### Compiling Oberon modules

See [Compiling](/doc/Compiling.md).

##### Porting to new platforms

See [Porting](/doc/Porting.md).

##### Roadmap

See [Roadmap](/doc/Roadmap.md).

##### Contributors

##### Origin of the name Vishap

##### To be left out?

Work on other compatibility layers is in progress.
voc team also works on bindings to existing C/Pascal libraries.

Commit message:

Update version to 1.95. Add more early version documentation.

ReadMe.md, after:

### Vishap Oberon

[ⱱishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



### Ѵishap Oberon

[Ѵishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



### Ꮙishap Oberon

[Ꮙishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



### 𝓥ishap Oberon

[𝓥ishap Oberon Compiler](http://oberon.vishap.am) (voc) is a free (GPLv3) professional oberon-2 compiler.



#### Licensing

Vishap Oberon's frontend and C backend engine is a fork of Josef Templ’s Ofront, which has been released
under the FreeBSD License. Unlike Ofront, Vishap Oberon does not include the Oberon v4 environment.

The Ulm Oberon Library is distributed under GPL.

The Ooc library is distributed under GPL.

Voc tools are distributed under GPLv3.

Most of the runtime in libVishapOberon is distributed under GPLv3 with runtime exception.

Proprietry code using the Ulm or Ooc libraries may not be statically linked as they are
distributed under the GPL.


#### Platform support

Vishap Oberon supports 32 and 64 bit little-endian architectures including Intel x86 and x64, arm and ppc.

It compiles under gcc, clang and Microsoft Visual C.

Installation supports GNU/Linux, MAC OSX, BSD and Windows (native and cygwin).

#### Language support

Vishap Oberon supports the Oberon 2 programming language, including type-bound procedures.

It can also compile programs written to the Oberon07 report.


#### Libraries

Vishap Oberon comes with libraries easing the porting of code from the major
Oberon systems:

 - Oberon V4 and S3 compatible library set.

 - ooc (optimizing oberon-2 compiler) library port.

 - Ulm’s Oberon system library port.

Some other freely redistributable libraries are available as a part of voc distribution.


#### Features

See [Features](/doc/Features.md).

#### Installing

See [Installing](/doc/Installing.md).

#### Compiling Oberon modules

See [Compiling](/doc/Compiling.md).

#### Porting to new platforms

See [Porting](/doc/Porting.md).

#### History

See [History](/doc/History.md).

#### Roadmap

See [Roadmap](/doc/Roadmap.md).

#### Contributors

Originally developed as a cross platform implementation of the
Oberon system by Joseph Templ.

Updated for 64 bit support, refactored as a standalone compiler and brought
to new platforms by Norayr Chilingarian.

Build process simplified for more platform support and bugs fixed by David
C W Brown.

#### Origin of the name Vishap

#### To be left out?

Work on other compatibility layers is in progress.
voc team also works on bindings to existing C/Pascal libraries.
